Can I ask a very basic question, which
is given all the hurdles that we've
talked about to developing Venezuela's
oil industry um and the vast amounts of
capital and time that this will seem to
need to take?
Is this really about oil?
I don't think so. Um
but I think for the president it might
be. Hm. Explain.
>> let let let me unpack that. Uh so
President President Donald Trump does
seem to think about oil a lot. He talks
about it a lot. Uh and always has done.
I mean, this is you can go back and see
his public record. He's someone who's
been in the public eye for decades. And
he talks about gasoline and oil quite a
lot. It seems to be quite central to his
view of the world, the global economy,
and domestic politics. And I I think to
some extent his viewpoint is kind of
locked in the 1980s, maybe the early
1990s. He sees oil as being sensitive
[snorts]
uh to geopolitical action. He sees it as
being a resource that is coveted, uh
that is important to have in large
quantities, and he sees as the price as
being crucial. You have to keep the
price of oil low. So, you need as much
oil on the market as you can uh so that
gasoline prices don't go up. Uh that
view is a little outdated at this point,
particularly from the point of view of
the United States. The US is now the
world's largest oil producer. It
produces more oil than any nation has
done in history and is likely to remain
so for the foreseeable future. Uh the US
doesn't import nearly as much crude as
it used to. Also, most of its crude
imports now come from relatively safe
places, Canada being first among them.
Uh putting aside the the any risk of,
you know, disruption of the US-Canada
bilateral relationship, uh the US can
get a lot of its crude from very safe,
secure places. It doesn't need oil from
Venezuela. And quite frankly, neither
does anybody else. There's quite a lot
of supply sloshing around. There's
available supply from other sources that
are cheaper, that are safer, that are
more competitive. So, framing this as a
move to seize oil
has always been a little bit hard for me
to accept ex- except from the point of
view of the president. Specifically,
what does the US want? The like the
official mind of the United States,
right? As a as a policy making uh
bureaucracy, as a as a as a great power.
I think this was first and foremost
about demonstrating US primacy in the
Western Hemisphere. You know, I I I do
think there is a brain trust now that
sees a resurgent Monroe Doctrine or
Donroe Doctrine, whatever you want to
call it. As being [clears throat] a
priority, you know, that the US should
shift its viewpoint away from places
like Europe and the Middle East and
should concentrate its attention on the
Western Hemisphere. And doing this,
putting a lot of pressure on a state
that has been a US adversary, putting
aside the fact that it's an oil
producer, you know, Venezuela has been
kind of anti-US for a long time.
Putting a lot of pressure on this state,
erecting an oil blockade, putting a
bounty on the head of its president, and
then flying in Delta Force to kidnap the
president, take him out, and put him on
trial in the US sends a very strong
signal to everyone that the US is now
going to be exercising its primacy in a
much more aggressive way. And I think
for the for for Trump,
I think there's an allure in making this
about
you know, materials and making it about
energy and making it about energy
security. Uh but at the end of the day,
as we've been saying, I don't think
companies are going to get interested or
involved anytime soon. And gasoline
prices are going to remain low for
reasons that have nothing to do with
what the US is doing in Venezuela.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> Tracy, quite a start to the year. Uh
yes. I mean, I was
actually at this point, I wasn't even
holding
>> it? I wasn't even holding out hope that
it might be a little bit quiet um at
least for the first week of the year.
I've just I've I've given up on that um
particular ambition. But you're right,
we had some huge news breaking over the
weekend. Isn't it just that it happened
on a Saturday? And of course, we're
talking about uh the arrest of uh
Maduro. It's not just that it happened
on a Saturday, it happened at 5:00 in
the morning or something on a Saturday.
So, I woke up and already had DMs.
They're like, "Are you guys going to do
an episode on this?" And I'm like, "An
episode on what? What are you talking
about?" And then it sort of 5 minutes
later, I was like, "What? He's in
custody? What happened? I don't
understand that at all." But yeah, it's
uh sort of a a geopolitical a genuine
earthquake, I would say. That sort of
It's a cliché that gets overused, but
this feels like an earthquake.
>> Yeah, there are a lot of firsts involved
here. So, like the first major US
intervention in South America since like
I guess the '80s. Um the first time the
US seems to have been this explicit
about going into a country because of
its oil reserves.
>> Yeah. That was surprising.
>> Yeah, that's the super interesting
thing. It's like it's not clear that,
you know, in the past at least like,
"Oh, it's about spreading democracy."
And I think one of the I guess funnier,
and I'm putting that in quotes cuz the
none of this is like particularly funny
per se, but it like there's no pretense
of like, "Oh, this opposition leader who
just won the Nobel Prize that she's
going to get a shot or anything like
that." It's a very strange It's so um
it's so face value. My my interpretation
is Trump wanted Maduro gone and got
Maduro gone. And the idea that they're
going to dress it up in some obvious
ideology or principle it other than
maybe dominating the hemisphere does not
seem to have entered the equation. But
but
>> But it might not be face value. And this
is not This is not what we're going to
talk about today, but there is a theory
going around that it's not really
because of the oil reserves, it's
because of um rare earth mining in
Venezuela, much of which was making its
way to China through various means. The
all kinds of No one Yeah, that's the
thing. There's like no like
Yes. You can imagine that telling
Americans, you know, we've we've
kidnapped a dictator and arrested him
for drug trafficking and the bonus is
you're going to get cheaper gas prices.
That probably resonates a little bit
more than like, "Well, we really needed
um you know, some rare earth like tan-
tantalum or something like that that
you've never heard of."
>> Yeah, no. Uh I have like a million
questions. I'm just trying to wrap my So
many people have a million questions.
Also, like I don't know. Like is this
totally unprecedented in terms of you
just snatch a foreign leader? I'm amazed
that this could like happen. It seems
like a possible like it seems so like
almost uneventful in the way like they
just went in and took a foreign leader.
You think that they'd be fortified with
thousands and thousands of guards and
some impenetrable palace or
evidently not. All just sort of still a
complete mystery of like what exactly
happened and what exactly it means or
where it's going and all this stuff. All
right, the immediate reaction though in
markets and the global economy was what
does this mean for the oil market?
Because supposedly Venezuela is the
holder of the the biggest reserve of
crude oil out
>> Yeah. something like 300 billion barrels
is the number that you see, which again
places it above noted exporters like
Saudi Arabia, right? But the issue is it
hasn't actually been pulling much of
that out of the ground for many, many
years. It's been producing I think like
a million barrels per day. Right. The
numbers that people are talking about to
actually improve the Venezuelan oil
infrastructure are staggering. So,
reserves mean nothing if you can't pull
it out of the ground. If you don't have
the infrastructure to do that, and then
who's going to pay for it at a time when
oil is below $60? I don't know how
economical that is. So many questions.
Anyway, we don't need to just keep
restating amongst each other [laughter]
We can just ask each other questions for
now.
>> have That's why we have guests on the
show because we like to ask them
questions. Anyway, we're excited to say
we really do have the perfect guest.
Someone we've talked to in the past,
including an episode about the oil
reserves in Guyana, which of course is
also part of the story cuz they're
neighbors and they have contested some
of the reserves are contested between
the two countries. We're going to be
speaking of course to Gregory Brew,
senior analyst at the Eurasia Group. So,
uh Greg, thank you so much for coming on
Odd Lots.
Uh thank you so much for having me back.
How did you find out? What what what was
your Saturday morning like?
So, my Saturday morning started very
early as uh all my mornings do now
because I have a 15-month
old at home. Uh so, I was making coffee
and I was doing what I always do, which
is uh checking Twitter or X, whatever
you call it. And I immediately saw, you
know, cryptic, vague tweets about
something that had happened that was
shocking, that had to do with Venezuela.
And after about 5 minutes, I saw that,
"Oh, no, we went in and
kidnapped the president, seized him,
apprehended him, uh
you know, rockets were fired,
helicopters flew over Caracas. It was
all very dramatic. Uh and my immediate
thought was, you know, what does this
mean for oil markets? Then I remembered
that it was Saturday morning and that
[laughter] there wasn't going to be any
market reaction.
Yeah, for 36 hours until Asia markets
open. I thought, "That's interesting."
You know, these things always seem to
happen on weekends now because whoever
is pulling the trigger wants to make
sure they put some space between
themselves and and the market reaction.
Can I just say I had a blissful 4 hours
between this actually happening and me
finding out on Saturday morning because
I had a friend over. Um we had an
old-fashioned sleepover, which was kind
of fun. And uh I was serving her coffee
and we were just talking. And then like
I showed her the door, immediately
looked at my phone, and was like, "Okay,
well, that's the end of my nice,
relaxing weekend." Wait. Wait. Let's
talk more about that. That's incredible
restraint to like spend a morning with a
friend without like half paying
attention to the phone cuz Thanks.
Thanks, Joe. I
I I know it's unusual for you.
>> All right. Um let's start with like Let
let's let's look at some of our priors
here. So Venezuelan oil reserves. I have
seen some debate around that 300 billion
number particularly from John Arnold the
hedge fund guy. He was saying that this
was a reserve figure that seemed to be
magically produced by Chavez the
previous Venezuelan leader and before
that the proven reserves number the one
that had actually been audited was a lot
lower. So do we actually know that
Venezuela has a lot of oil?
Well, you know, this this conversation
could get very technical very quickly
but we can yeah, we let's let's dive in.
What are oil reserves?
So first you start with the technically
recoverable reserves i.e. you know, what
is the oil in the ground? What have you
discovered through geological surveys
through drilling test wells etc.
From that point of view Venezuela could
have as much as a trillion barrels of
oil within its territory in the
Maracaibo Basin to the west but also
most significantly in the Orinoco Basin
in the east and southeast of the country
which is where this very heavy heavy
extra heavy sour crude is located. It's
probably the largest continuous reserve
of oil in the world. Its rivals would be
the tar sands of Alberta and the Gawar
field in eastern Saudi Arabia. So
technically there is maybe a trillion
barrels of oil there. But when we get
down to what is recoverable, you know,
the US Geological Survey did a report on
this in I think 2009 and the figure they
landed on was between 400 and 500
billion barrels of what you could pull
out of the ground, you know, if if not
not counting on price not counting on
how much money you were willing to
spend. Then we get to proven reserves
and proven reserves are a function of
price profitability available investment
security you know, assessing risks how
much you need to pay if you're a an
international oil company how much you
need to split with the national
government all of that and that's where
we get a much more fuzzy figure. You
know, OPEC they have figures on proven
reserves the energy information
administration of the United States puts
out proven reserve figures on various
countries. When it comes to Venezuela,
there is that that incident of the Hugo
Chavez government radically upgrading
the amount of oil that they said was
recoverable in I think it was 2007. The
thing about that though is that at the
time
Brent crude prices were upwards of $100
a barrel. So the price of oil was very
high. Cut to today where you know,
adjusting for inflation the price is
very low. It's $60 a barrel but you
know, compared to the price in 2007 it's
even lower than that. So saying that
Venezuela has 300 billion barrels of oil
that you could pull out of the ground
right now
just isn't accurate. The oil is there
but trying to get it out in the current
market conditions given all the risks
involved the security concerns the
upheaval in Venezuela and then just the
amount of money you would need to
upgrade the infrastructure and to drill
the wells the figure is much lower than
300 billion. It's a lot. Neighboring
Guyana has proven reserves of around 20
billion barrels and there's at least
twice that in the Maracaibo Basin in the
west of Venezuela. So there is a lot of
oil there but whether it approaches 300
billion barrels is is the subject of
much debate.
When oil prices when the oil market
opened on Sunday night there really
hasn't been much of a reaction and I
think it's sort of intuitive which is
that you could come up with any number
you want 100 a trillion 300 billion 100
billion in the medium and short term
what matters I presume is capacity to
pump barrels and sell them. And one of
the things that we've seen we've seen
these charts of how Venezuelan oil
production over the years has dropped
off quite precipitously and there are
various sort of potential drivers
including maybe price
maybe sanctions but also the story that
the you know, the the socialist
government that that nationalized a lot
of the oil infrastructure has let the
oil infrastructure deteriorate. Give us
your read like I know where you don't
literally have a chart here but if you
could like have that chart
in your mind
>> Everyone imagine a chart of a line going
down.
>> down. Why don't you like tell us the
story of that chart?
Sure. Sure. I love describing charts.
>> [laughter]
>> And I'm also you know, as as Joe well
knows Tracy probably knows well I'm a
historian by training. So I love to go
back in time and start at the beginning
and the beginning for Venezuela oil is
over 100 years ago. Venezuela is one of
the oldest oil producers in the world.
You know, first began to commercially
produce crude in the 1920s 1930s. For a
while you know, close to 30 years it was
arguably the second most important oil
producer in the world and in the western
hemisphere because it was so close to
the United States. It was sending a lot
of its crude to the US. This was before
the Middle East became a major concern
in the 50s and 60s. You know, Venezuela
is has been around for a long time. It's
pumped a lot of crude.
When we think about the chart for
Venezuela oil production, it's actually
you know, it's it's less of a collapse
in the last 20 years. If you look at it
it's more of a W.
Venezuela crude output goes up and up
and up from the 20s all the way up to
the early 70s where it exceeds 3 million
barrels a day.
That is I believe
the historic peak for Venezuela output.
In the mid-1970s Venezuela production
starts to fall. It falls quite sharply.
There are a lot of reasons for that one
of which is the Middle East. You know,
they were facing much stiffer
competition cheaper producers.
You know, they had to investment was
being cut. They had to drop production.
So production falls from the 70s into
the 80s. In the 90s it starts to climb
again and this has to do with PDVSA the
Venezuelan national oil company. For a
long time PDVSA was kind of unique when
it comes to national oil companies. You
know, we talk about Aramco in Saudi
Arabia the Iraqi petroleum company the
Kuwaiti petroleum company you know,
almost every big oil producer in the
world has a national oil company.
Venezuela's PDVSA for a long time was
run like a
capitalist enterprise. It was run on the
basis of securing profit. It was in the
90s it was very good at
making deals with the international oil
companies both from the west and
elsewhere. So
in the 90s you know, about 30 35 years
ago Venezuela output starts to climb
again and in the early 2000s it gets
close to 3 million barrels a day just as
prices are peaking. You know, Venezuela
is making a tremendous amount of money
in the early 2000s. It's I think got the
highest per capita
income of any South American country at
the time. It's extremely wealthy. It's
making a lot of money. In comes Hugo
Chavez and Chavismo you know, this this
political ideology built around
a very large socialist welfare state
lots of public enterprise national
companies but also a lot of
authoritarianism a lot of corruption a
lot of kleptocracy
and Chavez pushes further
nationalizations of the oil industry.
The oil industry had already been
nationalized. You know, we we could go
down another rabbit hole and talk about
the history of resource nationalism in
Venezuela but the industry had been
nationalized in the 70s. What had been
done in the 90s was you know, more joint
deals with international companies
bringing in international capital.
Chavez closes that door and demands that
all companies operating in Venezuela
give PDVSA a 60% share.
He demands much higher royalties much
pulling much more money out of the
existing deals and as a result
production starts to fall because
suddenly the investment is drying up.
International firms aren't as interested
in operating in Venezuela. They're
pulling back. In the meantime PDVSA is
turning from a pretty well run oil
company into
basically a piggy bank for Chavez and
his and his government.
When it turns over to Maduro it gets
even worse. There's more mismanagement
more corruption. Meanwhile Venezuela's
oil fields which are tricky to manage
given the nature of the crude the
technical problems that you encounter.
You know, the industry falls into
disrepair
in the in the in the 2000s.
The price collapses the oil price
collapses in 2014 2015. This coincides
with lots of protests against the Maduro
government you know, street uprisings
violent repression. Maduro is cracking
down and Venezuela oil production just
tanks.
And at the same time the US is putting
sanctions on Venezuela considerable
sanctions in connection to Maduro's
repression. So all of this coalesces
into a story that has its peaks that has
its valleys but when we get to 2025
Venezuela is sitting on this giant oil
industry that has fallen into disrepair.
It's producing a little bit less than a
million barrels a day. It ostensibly has
this massive reserve of crude oil that
American companies actually have a lot
of experience with dealing with Chevron
Exxon the oil services companies smaller
US mid-caps. All of them have been
involved or many of them have been
involved in Venezuela over the last you
know, century. So they they know what's
at stake down there but they also know
the risks the costs and I think they're
going to be very wary of getting
involved again particularly as the
situation remains so uncertain. Joe, I'm
going to start a rival band called heavy
sour crude. [laughter]
>> going to be the complete opposite of
like
>> of music are you going to play? I don't
know. Pop. Yeah, okay. No, I don't I
don't really want to do that but but I'm
I'm going to think about it.
Um girl My side project. You could be in
it.
Yeah, I could be a spin-off. Heavy sour
crude.
>> Tracy's a good voice by the way.
>> Oh, thank you. I I really don't. I
always sing in
>> Yes, you do. I've done karaoke with you
several times. You have a very good
voice.
>> Okay, off topic, Greg. Um
Okay, here's a basic question. Given all
the risks involved in Venezuela, um and
I remember my husband actually went to
Venezuela once when he was a teenager,
and the stories he told me were a little
bit hair-raising, including as soon as
he landed, someone tried to steal his
bag, and then he remembers going to a
movie theater, and they were selling
life insurance alongside the ticket to
the movie theater.
Again, all anecdotal. I can't exactly
vouch for those, but given the risks of
operating in Venezuela, and the fact
that you do have this heavy sour crude
that's, you know, difficult to refine,
why is one question I always wondered,
why is Chevron even still there?
So, I'll start by saying that the oil
industry, uh,
it has a pretty expansive
approach to time. Things take a long
time. Uh, when you discover a field,
when it's in greenfield stage, where you
drill test wells, where you expand and
explore how big the reserve is, from
that point to actually producing oil in
commercial quantities, it can be a
decade. Uh, a decade plus, particularly
if it's maybe like an offshore field
like in Guyana or elsewhere.
Uh, then if you're a big, uh,
you know, relatively integrated,
vertically integrated international oil
company, you're going to have places
that you want to send that crude. You're
going to have refineries, uh, and
downstream assets that you're going to
send the crude to. And when it comes to
heavy sour,
uh, from Venezuela or from Canada, uh,
refineries need to be built and
optimized to take that crude.
Uh, because otherwise, it's not going to
be efficient. Your refinery utilization
isn't going to be where you want it to
be. Uh, your margins are going to be
tighter. So, Chevron spent a long time
developing their position in Venezuela,
uh, which from various points of view
does go back, uh, I think to the I think
to the 1940s is where Chevron first
began, uh, to expand its operations in
in the western basin, the Maracaibo
basin.
They've built refineries in the US Gulf
Coast that are optimized to take
Venezuelan crude.
Uh, so the cost, the sunken cost for
them is considerable. And that's where
it kind of always comes down to, right?
Other IOCs were willing to pull out of
Venezuela, cut their losses, go
elsewhere. Chevron wasn't. And part of
that was due to how much money they had
spent. Part of that was due to their
success at convincing the US government
to allow them to remain, right? Granting
them sanctions waivers, granting them
special licenses to continue to operate.
At the same time, they were able to
leverage their position with the
Venezuelan government, and say, "You
need us. You need us to stay because at
some point things are going to get
better, and you are going to get, uh,
increased international interest and
investment, uh, and we were here first,
and, you know, we we we want to maintain
this privileged position." So, all of
that has combined to keep Chevron in
Venezuela when other companies were
willing to pull back. And there's
already been, uh, I I think a response
from Chevron following the Maduro, uh,
operation. They're talking about sending
their their teams back in. They're
talking about expanding their their
profile there. They're still very
conscious of the security risks and the
risks to personnel that exist, but they
want to hold on to what they have, and
they want to expand it. And you know,
considering the costs, [clears throat]
putting that to one side, Venezuela is
still geographically a very attractive
place to operate if you have lots of US
downstream assets. If you have
refineries in the Gulf Coast, and you
want to get heavy sour crude to them,
Venezuela is a great place to get that
crude.
Well, give us your read, uh,
on the political situation, I guess,
because there is I mean, I don't know
exactly what the sort of political
science definition of the term regime
change is. We went in and took out the
president, but the party, his It looks
like at least for now, his vice
president, Delcy Rodríguez, has assumed,
at least on an interim basis, the
presidency. There's no I mean, I thought
it was really remarkable. Trump didn't
even sort of like make a nod to like,
"Oh, the democratically elected leader
in exile," or whatever. And yet,
um
the administration seems cool with like
his people still being there. And as you
just mentioned, uh, the company is like,
"All right, we're already ready to send
people back in to get back to work."
Just like
>> [clears throat]
>> I assume everything's so fluid, I
suppose. But what's your read on like
the sort of short to medium political
situation now in Venezuela?
So, I think it's it's become very clear
that from the US point of view, getting
Maduro out was the goal. Yeah.
>> Uh, or, you know, overtaking the
government, uh,
knocking the government down, having it
replaced by a completely new power
apparatus, completely new regime,
bringing in the opposition, the
democratic opposition. Uh, that I don't
think was ever on the cards. This was
about removing Maduro. And and I think,
you know, you could make the argument
that some of it was personal for
President Trump. He didn't like Maduro.
Maduro had been, uh, driving a hard
bargain because they've been negotiating
for months about what the US can get
from Venezuela, and what kinds of
concessions that Maduro could offer. And
Trump us apparently lost his patience
and decided to do something pretty
risky, but it turns it turns out was was
very successful. The government that
Maduro led, which incidentally he
inherited from Hugo Chávez, uh, is still
there. It's led by Delcy Rodríguez and
others. It still controls the military.
It still manages most of the country.
Parts of the country are are are
slightly out of its control and are run
by essentially drug cartels and militias
further in further inland, but the
capital, the major cities, the oil
fields are still under control of the
government that used to be led by
Maduro. What happens next, I think,
depends on what kind of, uh, modus
vivendi is reached between Washington
and Caracas. Uh, and some of that comes
down to what it is that Trump actually
wants out of this. I think the first
goal was demonstrating US power, and I
think they've done that.
Uh, signaling to, uh, the rest of the
world, but particularly the western
hemisphere, that the US is now willing
to use its power, uh, much more
assertively and aggressively than it has
in the past. Uh, but that's not much.
You know, what what else could the US
gain from having done this? And
obviously now it's all talk about
gaining access to the oil reserves and
and bringing in US companies, but that's
going to be very very difficult to do.
So, I think in the short term, the first
thing that Caracas is going to want to
see from the US is lifting the oil
blockade and allowing tankers to move.
Uh, most of those tankers are going to
want to go to China because that's who's
been taking most of Venezuelan oil. Uh,
that might not be too difficult for
Trump to accept because Trump also wants
to reach, uh, modus vivendi with
Beijing. He wants to have a better
relationship with Xi Jinping. That's
also something that the administration
has been trying to prioritize. But the
the political situation in Venezuela,
absent Maduro, doesn't appear to have
changed at all. The regime is still
there. It's not regime change. It it it
isn't even regime decapitation, uh,
because Maduro was replaceable. And they
filled his shoes with somebody else, and
the administration seems perfectly fine
with that.
What kind of chatter are you actually
hearing from the oil majors, setting
Chevron aside? Um, what would it take to
get like an Exxon, um, who I understand
is still owed money by the Venezuelan
government, um, back into the country?
What are they looking for?
So, I think you can think of it in
stages. So, the first would be lifting
the blockade. They would have to see
that. They would have to see the US
saying publicly Venezuela can export oil
again because no one's going to want to
go in and spend money in in Venezuela if
they can't be guaranteed access to to
foreign markets, right? I think the the
US has been trying to signal that the
blockade is about stopping sanctioned
tankers, but it's been, uh,
I I it's been indiscriminate in the
sense that it hasn't been specifically
connected to what the US is clearly
trying to do in Venezuela, which is, you
know, remove Maduro and exert more
pressure on the government. Uh, so the
blockade would have to be lifted. And
then sanctions would have to be lifted,
right? Venezuela remains under heavy
sanction. The Maduro government remains
under sanction. Uh, and international
oil companies, western companies, aren't
going to want to go into a country where
they're exposed to sanctions risk.
They're just not going to be interested.
Even if the price were to go up, and
even if uh, the the the numbers started
to make a little bit more sense, that's
still too great of a risk, uh, to take
on at this time. Uh, the price coming up
would also have to happen. Yeah.
>> Right? The current market condition just
doesn't justify spending billions of
dollars developing fields, uh, when, uh,
the price is at $60 barrel, it's likely
to fall even more in the
>> Yeah, if you look at like the new rig
chart, right? It's going down even in
the US at $60 a barrel. I can't imagine
that people are like, "Well, now we'll
just open some facilities
[clears throat] in Venezuela."
Exactly. And yeah, compared to I mean,
again, we bring it up a couple of times,
but Guyana next door has been a
tremendously profitable place for Exxon
to operate.
The US onshore is still very attractive.
It's safe. You know, there's
you're not going to have, uh, Delta
Force coming in and pulling off covert
operations in the Permian or, you know,
in North Dakota. You know, no one's
going to have to worry about that. So,
if you've got capital, and you want to
find somewhere to invest it, there are
better places to do so Yeah.
>> than in Venezuela. Add to all that, you
know, the infrastructural problems, the
technical problems, the heavy sour
being, uh, it needs to go through
upgraders, it needs to be passed through
diluents, it needs to be, uh, treated in
a certain way for it even to be viable,
right? Uh, there's a lot of money and a
lot of time and a lot of effort that
would have to go in on top of all the
geopolitical risks and the uncertainty
and the market conditions. Tell us more
though about, um,
uh, Guyana and, um, because that the
first time we had you on, I think that's
what we, uh, talked about and how much
oil they have there, but I know that the
Venezuelan government had claimed at
least some or part or all of their oil
was actually theirs. Was there ever any
legitimacy to this? Tell Tell us about
the backstory there and whether there's
any whether this changes anything with
that.
Well, I think you know upshot is we're
probably not going to hear any more from
Venezuela about threatening Guyana given
the tenuous position of the Delcy
Rodriguez government if it lasts. I I
think they're going to want to make
friends rather than enemies even though
there was some pretty
you know boisterous rhetoric initially.
Now the attitude seems to be much more
we want to work with the US. We want
sanctions relief. We want to lift the
blockade. Pulling back from threatening
Guyana is going to be a part of that.
The historical claim you know like South
America territorial disputes are
actually pretty wide ranging. Everybody
seems to have a claim on everybody else
if they want to dredge them up which the
Maduro government decided to do.
You know last year and the year before I
don't think anybody took them seriously.
Guyana is not in a position to defend
itself unfortunately. It's a very small
country, but at the same time
I think they were confident that the US
would back them up. China is also
involved in the Guyana offshore
developments through Chinese national
oil companies. They hold a minority
share and at the same time Brazil
was willing to back up Guyana and was
was pushing back very hard on Venezuela
when Maduro was making those claims. So
like the territorial claim is
historical, but there's not a whole lot
to it.
I don't think now that Maduro is gone I
don't think we're going to hear much
more about it, but it's still going to
sort of float in the ether. The The
other point that I would make is you
know the market as you noted didn't care
too much when this happened, right? Oil
prices didn't really change.
The whole attitude to this drama with
the blockade and everything like it
hasn't really affected prices. Part of
that is because there really wasn't a
sense that there was much risk to other
sources, but Guyana is right there. And
and were things to get really bad
Venezuela internal instability
continuation of the blockade the US
could threaten to seize assets if it
wanted to exert even more leverage over
Caracas. That would increase the risk of
escalation to affect neighboring oil
producing countries with Guyana being
first on the list. Can I ask a very
basic question which is given all the
hurdles that we've talked about to
developing Venezuela's oil industry
and the vast amounts of capital and time
that this will seem to need to take.
Is this really about oil?
I don't think so. Um
but I think for the president it might
be. Hmm. Explain.
>> And let let let me unpack that. So
President President Donald Trump does
seem to think about oil a lot. He talks
about it a lot
and always has done. I mean this is you
can go back and see his public record.
He's someone who's been in the public
eye for decades and he talks about
gasoline and oil quite a lot. It seems
to be quite central to his view of the
world, the global economy and domestic
politics. And I I think to some extent
his viewpoint is kind of locked in the
1980s maybe the early 1990s. He sees oil
as being
>> [snorts]
>> sensitive to geopolitical action. He
sees it as being a resource that is
coveted that is important to have in
large quantities and he sees as the
price as being crucial. You have to keep
the price of oil low. So you need as
much oil on the market as you can
so that gasoline prices don't go up.
That view is a little outdated at this
point particularly from the point of
view of the United States. The US is now
the world's largest oil producer. It
produces more oil than any nation has
done in history and is likely to remain
so for the foreseeable future. The US
doesn't import nearly as much crude as
it used to. Also most of its crude
imports now come from relatively safe
places Canada being first among them.
Putting aside the any risk of you know
disruption of the US Canada bilateral
relationship the US can get a lot of its
crude from very safe secure places. It
doesn't need oil from Venezuela and
quite frankly neither does anybody else.
There's quite a lot of supply sloshing
around. There's available supply from
other sources that are cheaper that are
safer that are more competitive. So
framing this as a move to seize oil
is always been a little bit hard for me
to accept except from the point of view
of the president. Specifically what does
the US want? The official mind of the
United States, right? As a as a policy
making
bureaucracy as a as a great power. I
think this was first and foremost about
demonstrating US primacy in the Western
Hemisphere. You know I I I do think
there is a brain trust now that sees a
resurgent Monroe Doctrine
Donroe Doctrine whatever you want to
call it as being a priority.
[clears throat]
You know that the US should shift its
viewpoint away from places like Europe
and the Middle East and should
concentrate its attention on the Western
Hemisphere and doing this putting a lot
of pressure on a state that has been a
US adversary putting aside the fact that
it's an oil producer. You know Venezuela
has been kind of anti-US for a long
time.
Putting a lot of pressure on this state
erecting an oil blockade putting a
bounty on the head of its president and
then flying in Delta Force to kidnap the
president take him out and put him on
trial in the US sends a very strong
signal to everyone that the US is now
going to be exercising its primacy in a
much more aggressive way and I think for
the for Trump
I think there's an allure in making this
about
you know materials and making it about
energy and making it about energy
security. But at the end of the day as
we've been saying I don't think
companies are going to get interested or
involved anytime soon and gasoline
prices are going to remain low for
reasons that have nothing to do with
what the US is doing in Venezuela.
Eric Levitz who work writes for Vox had
a good tweet. He was like when we were
younger you know we would do these wars
and people would sit they would say this
is about democracy and people say no
this is really about oil. This is like
the first time where someone said this
is about oil and it's like actually we
don't really believe you. This is about
like some It's a It's It's just very I
mean it's it's very surreal. Um
As a you know you work for a
geopolitical analyst shop what's the
buzz
what is the thinking on Greenland now in
the wake of this cuz like what what one
thing that we've discovered is that it's
sort of like extra
If there's one thing that the events of
the past week have shown is that
extraordinary unilateral actions of any
sort suddenly on the table. And so look
if we could just go in and snatch a
foreign leader then who knows maybe one
day we land over Greenland and say this
is all ours. Do you have like odds of
any sort of Greenland event happening in
2026 that would shock us in maybe a
different era?
I I don't think I have personal odds on
it. I will say you know that now that
the US has done this everybody is
thinking about what Trump might do next
and that gives that gives the US more
leverage than it had a week ago. That
puts that puts the administration in a
position to say like maybe we will
do something with Cuba. Maybe we will do
something with Colombia. Maybe we will
push the Danes to give us more access to
Greenland to give us more rights to
allow us to erect more bases
or we could just annex Greenland
directly. You know see see what he's
going to do about that. I I think now
that there's so much uncertainty about
how the US is going to use its power
that creates space for the US to make
all kinds of new demands and get new
concessions even if you know actually
annexing Greenland is
really not on the cards. You know it's
it's not I don't think it's something
that the administration wants to do, but
it likes to threaten it. Yeah. The The
The official like tick-tock of how this
all went down as far as I know like
hasn't really been reported anywhere,
but it it's hard [clears throat] to
observe a story in which you snatch a
foreign leader without suffering any
casualties of your own and not assume
that there were quite a few people on
the inside that knew this was coming
that had de facto flipped etc. Every
leader
in our neighborhood who has some sort of
you know tension with Trump must be
terrified like presumably they're all
paranoid about who in their inner circle
is really with them.
I think I think they have to be. I also
think there's a kind of an underreported
element here an underreported story and
that's the techno the technological side
of it. The US didn't just send in
special operations teams and didn't just
liaise with insiders within the Maduro
government to
you know facilitate his removal although
they almost certainly did. There were
almost certainly were members of
Maduro's inner circle who collaborated
and facilitated his removal.
US aircraft jammed Venezuelan
communications. Venezuelan air defenses
were either destroyed preemptively by
US aircraft or they were knocked out
through cyber means. The US reportedly
used suicide drones for the first time
which is something we're going to hear
more about cuz this is an administration
that's interested in using drones more
aggressively.
Trump bragged that they knocked power
out in Caracas using cyber tool. I mean
it's it's not just the intent that the
US administration has. It's the
capabilities, right? The US we always
talk about the US being a global
superpower. It is. It's one of the only
countries in the world that can do this
and if it wants to start doing it more
it's a risk that states around the world
are going to have to take into
consideration. There's also the element
of what we don't know. We don't know all
the capabilities that the US military
has at its disposal be it cyber be it
asymmetric be it uh you know kinetic
operations. Nobody really we still don't
have a fully
formed picture of what the F-35 can do
against older generations of air
defenses, older generations of aircraft.
This opens up the aperture of, you know,
what
21st century warfare looks like and
that's creating even more uncertainty
and even more concern.
Days into the new year and we're already
talking about suicide drones, Joe. Yeah,
I know. It's going to be an insane year.
Um I realize one thing we haven't
mentioned in this entire conversation I
think and that's probably a sign of the
times is we haven't talked about OPEC at
all and this was the other thing that
happened over the weekend was there was
an OPEC meeting where they talked about
pausing or continuing to pause their
production quotas because of the low oil
price.
Does OPEC matter anymore and have you
gotten any sense of like what the major
OPEC OPEC players are actually thinking
about this Venezuela action?
Well, first I would say you know
Venezuela is
a marginal member of OPEC at this point
given how low its production has fallen.
It's excused from production
cuts and production quotas because it's
under sanction.
Incidentally, Iran is in the same
position as is Libya.
Uh Venezuela doesn't produce very much.
Really OPEC is the GCC plus Russia at
this point through the OPEC plus
alliance. Those are really the members
that matter.
And they do matter. I mean what OPEC has
done over the last year progressively
pulling back production cuts, putting
more crude on the market, signaling that
they're going to produce more even with
prices falling. That's a pretty
deliberate strategy coming after years
of trying to manage markets by cutting
production. They've now signaled that
they're okay with prices falling as long
as they're able to retake market share
and also reduce the amount of spare
capacity that's hanging over. I mean in
the last year
uh or in in 2024, there was
maybe three, maybe four million barrels
of spare capacity that was just hanging
over the market and that's going to put
a pretty uh firm ceiling on prices when
you have that much spare crude just
lying on the sidelines. OPEC is trying
to unwind that. They're they're
comfortable with prices falling I think
in 2026, maybe as low as, you know, in
the 50s uh per barrel for Brent. It's
already in the 50s here in the US, the
WTI price. Uh but OPEC is looking ahead.
They're looking into 2027, 2028 and they
reckon that by that point they'll be
coming out in a stronger market
position, they'll have squeezed their
competitors including their competitors
in the US and they'll have a bigger
chunk of the market and less spare
capacity that will put a ceiling on
prices and they reckon, you know, we'll
have $50 crude in 2026 and then 80,
maybe even $90 crude 2028, 2029, 2030.
Needless to say, they don't see demand
peaking anytime soon. They reckon the
market's going to continue to grow
>> [clears throat]
>> maybe a little bit more slowly than it
has in the past, but it's not going to
start declining due to the energy
transition or or any other factor.
That's the bet that OPEC is making.
So does this event mean anything
significant to some of Venezuela's or
Maduro's friends, you know, Iran, China,
Russia, etc. Like as you, you know, what
as
obviously it seems like to, you know,
China they'll be able to
they could get oil from other places,
etc. But like is there any real
significance to that or were they just
sort of like sort of ideological
friends? Are there any real stakes for
them?
So I'll start with the Chinese and one
thing that got buried a little bit was
that the there was a Chinese delegation
in Caracas
>> Yeah. when the coup happened.
And and you know, if you're China, if
you're Xi Jinping
and you are in the midst of a sort of
soft rapprochement with the United
States, right? Trump is going to go to
China, Xi they're going to meet in 2026,
there's going to be sideline meetings.
They're trying to manage their
relationship. Trump wants a deal
and all of that. They don't want a
confrontation. If you're in that
position and you send a delegation to
Venezuela and then suddenly the US flies
in Delta Force and kidnaps the president
and they don't tell you beforehand, uh
that's going to be alarming. The Chinese
put out a statement where they they
expressed their alarm in very explicit
terms
regarding this action. I don't think it
was necessarily that they love Maduro
and they were, you know, mad that the US
came in and took him. I think they were
more mad that the US didn't tell them in
advance that this was going to happen.
Uh
but on the oil side, yeah, China can get
their crude from from other sources
including Iran.
You know, as Joe you probably well know
and Tracy as well. I also cover Iran for
the Eurasia Group. So I I spend a lot of
time thinking about Iran and the
Iranians are terrified right now.
They're extremely paranoid
that the US cuz Trump's also been
tweeting about the protests that are
happening. He's been saying, you know,
the US is going to get involved. The
Iranians have been very worried that the
Israelis are going to bomb them again.
They're they're extremely concerned
about that. There's their economy is
doing very poorly. They're extremely
worried that
you know, after doing Maduro the US is
going to turn on them. So they're
they're signaling that they could do
something. They're they're warning that
they could attack preemptively. Tensions
are rising in that quarter. On Russia, I
don't think Putin is concerned.
Venezuela was kind of a soft partner for
Russia. They had dealings, they had
relations. There has been I think a
certain amount of outreach from Moscow
to Caracas towards the Delcy Rodriguez
government so they want to retain their
relationship there, but I don't think
they're shedding many tears about Maduro
being being swept away. I also don't
think Putin is worried that the US is
going to try to do the same to him.
Can you put a sort of percentage
likelihood on some sort of US action on
Iran in the next, I don't know, month,
let's say?
I would say low in the next month, uh
below 50%. Um public action. I don't
think the US is going to start
uh you know, bombing Iran or sending
troops in or anything like that. For a
couple of reasons, one I don't think
Trump is interested in getting that
directly involved. I think he threatens
it,
uh but I think there's still
a weariness of putting boots on the
ground anywhere. The protests in Iran
are very violent. They are a clear
demonstration of internal
dissatisfaction and dissent towards the
government. They're also fairly small
and they've been they've triggered a
quite uh active response from Iran's
police and internal security services.
So they they don't see it's it's not in
the realm of say like Egypt in the in
the Arab Spring where you had hundreds
of thousands [clears throat] of
protesters, you know, coming out putting
huge amount of pressure on a government
and facility and also, you know, turning
the military, right? The Egyptian
military switched sides. We're not even
close to that in Iran and I don't think
Trump wants to get pulled into a
potential quagmire. Doing stuff covertly
is another matter and that's where the
Israelis really come into play. Israel
has a lot of capabilities inside Iran
more so than the US. They're capable of
doing a lot. At the same time, the
Israelis have retained a posture where
they say if if Iran tries to rebuild
their nuclear program and if they
continue to build missiles, we will
strike. We will take action because
those are the concerns that we have and
the Iranians are continuing to build
missiles and they are now today
January 6th threatening to attack
preemptively if the pressure continues
to build. The tensions are getting very
very high there. I don't think the US is
going to get directly involved, but the
possibility of more Israeli action in
the next month is is is certainly there.
And I would say almost certainly in the
first half of 2026 I think we're going
to see new strikes by Israel on Iran.
Just since we're throwing out random
countries and sort of testing your uh
uh tell us about Cuba. Uh
what does this mean for Cuba? So I think
I think Cuba is very much on the menu so
to speak. I think we're going to hear
more about Cuba now that they have done
what they want to do in Venezuela.
Obviously Secretary of State Marco Rubio
has a long running interest in if not
toppling the government in Havana then
putting a great deal more pressure on
Havana. Venezuela was a partner of Cuba.
Venezuela was main source of crude oil.
So Venezuela being another element of
the US posture towards the new
government in Caracas is going to be to
pull them away from Cuba, to isolate
Cuba even more in the Western
Hemisphere. I don't think military
action is likely in the near term cuz
they still have a lot of work to do with
Venezuela and moving on very quickly
to another large country is going to be
difficult for them, but I do think it's
going to enter into US policy moving
forward. Joe, I watched The Godfather II
over Christmas and now I consider myself
a Cuban history expert. I need to
rewatch Godfather II. Greg Brew, thank
you so much. You really were the perfect
guest. I do feel like we could just
throw random questions out about
anything geopolitics or energy for you
and you would have an answer. So we'll
have to have you back on again soon and
just more lightning round stuff, but
really appreciate you coming on Odd
Lots.
Absolutely. Thank you so much for having
me back. Godfather one or two, Greg?
Two. Oh, interesting.
>> Yeah. De Niro. Yeah.
I got it. Greg is so good. I love
talking
>> good. And he brings that historical
perspective which is great and which I
think you need for something like this
which isn't just a market story. It's
very much a geopolitical story. No, it's
really you know, there was a quote I
might write about it in the newsletter
today. There was a quote recently from
uh
President Trump about rare earth. He's
like rare earths really aren't that rare
which is true and it's one of those
things that we talk about like people I
like to say, well, what's rare is the
infrastructure to refine them and
actually get anything commercial with
it, right? That's actually a scarce and
I feel like this is the thing that
always gets missed in a lot of these oil
conversations. Like oh, $300 billion of
oil is totally meaningless if you don't
have the all the aspects in place to
actually produce it at scale, produce it
economically. And so, I'm not surprised,
I guess, that from the perspective of
like the oil market that trades
day-to-day, it seems like at minimum,
it's going to be years before this oil,
like to the extent that there's some
change, actually moves the market.
>> Right. And again, I know the oil
industry does work on long time frames,
but when you have oil at $60 a barrel on
Brent, lower on WTI, it seems really
hard to make the case that like we
should go in and spend billions in
Venezuela when they're not even starting
rigs in the US. The other thing I saw,
um you know, the headlines are flying
thick and fast on this particular story,
and I guess we should just mention that
we're recording this on January 6th, but
uh you know, Trump just said that maybe
they could use public money to encourage
oil companies to invest in Venezuela, US
oil companies. And that seems a hard
sell to me
as well.
Um
>> you think the guys in Midland are going
to take that? We're going to like use
public money to for expand supply and
depress prices further?
Yeah, hard sell, putting it mildly.
>> way, have you watched Land Man, the
show?
>> No, but I've I've heard mixed things.
>> it's so good. Yeah, I started it. It's
so good. You got to watch it. I So,
yeah, it makes me want to do a lot more
uh episodes about independent oil
producers, but I'll watch it.
>> You got to watch it. All right, shall we
leave it there? Let's leave it there.
This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm
Joe Weisenthal. You can follow me at the
Stalwart. Follow our guest, Gregory
Brew. He's at Gbrew24.
Follow our producers, Carmen Rodriguez
at Carmen Arman, Dashiell Bennett at
Dashbot, and Keil Brooks at Keil Brooks.
And if you want more All Thoughts
content, you should definitely check out
our daily newsletter. You can find that
at bloomberg.com/allthoughts.
And you can join fellow listeners in
conversation 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/allthoughts.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like the video or leave a
comment or better yet, subscribe. Thanks
for watching.
>> [music]
[music]